Home  Blog  Finance & Legal  Home Loan & EMI 
Latest RBI Guidelines for Home Loans 2024-25
Print ShareUpdated: Nov 27, 2024, 11:00 IST By: Divyani Ahuja
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) guidelines for home loans are issued to
help eligible candidates planning to buy a home to avail of home loan
beneﬁts. Check out the latest RBI guidelines on Home Loans.
Show More
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) governs the guidelines for home  loan and
keeps changing them due to various factors aﬀecting the economy. Read the
blog to understand what RBI is, and how its guidelines for home loans impact
the borrower.Latest RBI G uidelines for Home Loans
2024-25
Table of Contents
RBI Guidelines for Home Loans 2024-25
1. Repo Rate
2. LTV (Loan to Value) Ratio
Nationalized in 1949, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the central bank of India
that was established to primarily manage and govern our country's ﬁnancial
system. It is also known as the banker’s bank and helps regulate the banking
sector.
Similarly, when it comes to ﬁnancing, RBI works as a central body  that gives
shape to all policies. Every lender, whether a bank, an NBFC or even a housing
ﬁnance company is expected to follow the guidelines of RBI while  lending a
loan, be it any type of loan - Home Loan , personal loan, gold loan, Loan Against
Property, Business Loan, etc. Read the article to know about the home loan
rules and regulations set by RBI.
RBI Guidelines for Home Loans 2024-25
We bring you the latest guidelines of RBI for the year 2024-25. 
1. Repo Rate
In the 06th consecutive MPC meeting held in the ﬁrst week of June 2024, the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) annou nced to keep the repo rate unchanged. The
last surge in repo rate was witnessed in February 2023. The rates were
increased by 25 basis points (bps) in 2023 taking it to 6.5 percent from the
earlier 6.25 percent.
2. LTV (Loan to Value) Ratio 
LTV ratio is an evaluation of lending risk that all ﬁnancial institutions, including
banks and NBFCs, take into account before oﬀering a home loan.
In order to encourage individuals to own a home and to make home loans
more aﬀordable, RBI has increased the Loan to Value Ratio up to 90% in case
the home loan is below Rs. 30 lakhs. Also, the LTV ratio for loans above Rs. 75
lakhs is up to 75%. Therefore, the higher the LTV value, the easier it would be
for an individual to purchase a property by ﬁnancing it through a home loan.
Home Loan Amount Loan to Value Ratio (LTV Ratio)
Up to Rs. 30 Lakh 90% of the property value
Between Rs. 30 Lakh & Rs. 75 Lakh 80% of the property value
More than Rs. 75 Lakh 75% of the property value
Furthermore, RBI has also announced that registration charges, stamp duty
and documentation charges will not be included at the time of calculating LTV.
Therefore, this reduces the payment of 10% that the home loan borrower is to
make upfront.. Also, if the cost of the house is not exceed Rs. 10 lakh, banks are
allowed to add registration, stamp duty and other documentation charges to
the house's cost to calculate the LTV ratio.
3. Prepayment Charges
A home loan can go up to Rs. 1 crore or even more in some cases, and the
maximum tenure goes up to 30 years. You can save money on your home loan
if you pay it partially or completely before the tenure ends. This can be
achieved if you get some extra money due to any reason (proﬁt in business or
salary hike). Therefore, to help home loan buyers prepay the loan, RBI has
waived oﬀ the prepayment charges in case of ﬂoating interest rate and has
kept the penalty up to 3% in case of a ﬁxed interest rate. Earlier, the lenders
were asking for a prepayment penalty of up to 5% of the loan amount.
You Might Also Like
Repo Rate & Reverse
Repo Rate 2025 : All …
Published:Feb 10, 2025, 08:00
Transfer Your Hom
Loan Keeping Thes
Published:Oct 14, 2024, 14
4. Balance Transfer Facility
In order to help home loan borrowers to reﬁnance their home loan , RBI has
waived the foreclosure charges. Home loan borrowers can now easily transfer
their current home loan to another bank to avail of a lower interest rate.
Therefore, when the borrower forecloses his home loan from the current bank,
he does not have to pay the foreclosure charges.
5. Repayment Tracking
The Reserve Bank of India states that it is necessary for lenders to share the
loan repayment status with borrowers in addition to all periodic updates. This
way, borrowers can keep track of the home loan amount they have already
repaid while managing their ﬁnances. 
6. RERA Approval for Home Loans
Home loans applied for under-construction projects need RERA approval. The
rule prevents fraudulent transactions and makes it easy for applicant s to invest
in safe and secure projects. 
7. Documents Veriﬁcation
The letter of allotment and register ed sale deed with other required documents
must be submitted along with the home loan application. All documents
submitted by home loan applicants will be veriﬁed digitally. This will speed up
the veriﬁcation process while reducing the possibility of fraudulent activities.
Once the loan is fully repaid, lenders must release all the property documents
within 30 days from the date of loan closure.
Now that we know the latest guidelines by RBI for a home loan, let us know the
eligibility criteria and things to keep in mind before applying for a home loan in
2024-25.
The Ideal Home Loan
Tenure 10/20/30 years
10 Eﬀective Tips to
Improve Home Loa
Tips t o reduce home loan inter est (P olicy Matters S01E153)
Tips to reduce home loan interest (Policy Matters S01E153)
Home Loans Eligibility As Per RBI Guidelines
Find below the home loan eligibility criteria set by the Reserve Bank of India.
Debt Repayment Capacity:  The good debt repayment capacity calculated
based on the credit score of the applicant plays a critical role in the Home
Loan application approval process. A high credit score and good debt
repayment record leads to a hassle home loan application approval.
Home Loan Agreement:  As per the RBI guidelines for home loans,
borrowers need to sign the loan agreement post home loan approval. The
agreement has all the terms and conditions mentioned that borrowe rs must
agree to before the loan amount gets disbursed. The conditions inclu de, the
interest rates, home loan amount, home loan tenure, and the loan
repayment schedule.
Home Loan Insurance:  The Reserve Bank of India highly recommends the
applicants to consider taking a home loan insurance policy. The policy
safeguards the home loan in case of unforeseen circumstances, such as the
demise of the home loan borrower. It helps reduce the ﬁnancial burden of
the family members settling the home loan without taking any responsibility
related to its repayment.
Documents Approval:  Home loan applicants need to provide an essential
set of documents when submitting their application. These documents
should be correct and up to date as they are used by the lender’s team to
verify the identity, address, and income of the applicant.
Things You Should Consider Before Applying for a
Home Loan in 2024-25
Compare Home Loan Options:  With the easy accessibility of online
platforms like  Magicbricks, you can compare various home loan options
under a single roof. Your research should include important aspe cts of a
home loan like interest rates, loan amount, tenure and other fees and
charges (processing fee, prepayment charges, stamp charges, etc.)
Comparing these factors before applying for a home loan allows you to
choose an aﬀordable home loan option.
Credit Score:  A credit score is one of the most crucial factors banks consider
before oﬀering a home loan. So, any individual planning to apply for a home
loan and requiring a low interest rate with favourable terms and conditions
should maintain a good credit score of 750 or above. Also, mainta ining a
good credit score is easy and can be done by just paying your loan and credit
card EMIs on time.
Tenure:  If you are planning to avail of a home loan, you must decide on the
tenure before you avail it. The EMIs of your home loan depend on your
tenure. Usually, banks prefer applicants with a shorter tenure and it is also
beneﬁcial for an individual as he is required to pay EMIs for the least period
of time. However, if you are comfortable paying EMIs for a longer  tenure,
you can opt for that too. You can analyze your repayment ability by using an
online Home Loan EMI Calculator  and decide the tenure accordingly.
Eligibility Criteria:  Before you apply for a home loan, it is important to know
the eligibility criteria of a speciﬁc lender so that your home loan application
does not face rejection. The home loan amount that you would be eligible
for will depend on your age, nature of work, credit score, income,  tenure,
etc. As income plays a major role in deciding the home loan amount, you can
apply for a loan with a co-applicant (spouse, son, unmarried daughter) as an
additional income will help in increasing the loan amount. You can use an
online Home Loan Eligibility Calculator and  list down a few banks matching
your eligibility.
Processing Fees:  It is a fee that every home loan borrower has to pay to the
lender to process the home loan application. Usually, most banks and NBFCs
charge a processing fee of up to 2% + GST. However, the processing fee can
vary from lender to lender. Therefore, you must look out for the bank
charging a low processing fee to avoid additional burdens.
Down Payment:  When you apply for a home loan, you are asked to pay a
down payment of 10% to 15% of the total home loan amount. And the rest
of the home loan amount is converted to the home loan EMI that you pay till
the tenure ends. Therefore, if you have enough savings available with you,
you can increase the down payment and can save on the interest that you
are supposed to pay in future.
Documents:  A home loan involves collateral and hence also a large number
of documents. Therefore, before you consider applying for a home loan with
a bank, you must always read the terms and conditions of the bank and also
inquire about all the documents required. If you fail to submit all the
necessary documents, the lender may reject your loan application.
RBI Guidelines for Home Loans Lenders
As of July 2024 the Reserve Bank of India has issued new guidelines for home
loans after conducting its annual inspection. As per new rules, it is mandatory
for all the home loan lenders, including banks and ﬁnancial service providers to
collect home loan interest amount from the actual loan disbursement date. 
As per RBI oﬃcials, currently, bank s and other home loan lenders charge home
loan interest amount from the date of sanctioning the home loan. The Reserve
Bank of India has also come across cases where banks have disbursed home
loans in the form of cheques and started charging interest from the date of
cheque issuance whereas the cheques were handed over to the borrowers a
few days later. RBI has directed ﬁnancial service providers to disburse home
loans online and not in the form of cheques or any other oﬄine method.
Summing Up: RBI Guidelines for Home Loan
RBI keeps changing the guidelines for home loans to encourage more and
more individuals to apply for them  and to get all the lenders on the same page
in terms of rules and regulations. It is always good to be familiar with the latest
guidelines of RBI so that you are well aware and choose the right home loan
lender.
READ MORE
Axis Bank Home
LoanHDFC Bank Home
LoanRole of CIBIL Score
Ideal Home Loan
TenureCIBIL Score for Home
LoanHome Loan NOC
Home Loan Top-
UpHome Loan InsuranceFixed or Floating Interest
Rate
Latest News
Posted on February
13,2025NEW
Lower EMIs on Home
Loans As Several Banks
Cut Repo Rate Linked …
Author : Sakshi ChandolaPosted on August
13,2024
RBI Tightens
Regulations for Housing
Finance Companies
Author : Vipra Chadha
In a signiﬁcant relief for
home loan borrowers with
EMIs linked to repo rate,
many banks have lowered
their home loan EMI interest
rates after a cut in repo rate.
In the most recent meeting of
the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC), the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
decided to cut repo rates by
25 basis points, bringing it
down to 6.25 percent. The
Changes in Repo Rate In the
MPC meeting held on
February 7, 2025, the Reserve
Bank of India lowered the
repo rate by 25 basis points,
bringing it down to...
Read MoreRBI has announced new
regulations for housing
ﬁnance companies (HFCs) to
align them with non-bank
ﬁnanciers. The move includes
higher liquid asset
requirements for deposit-
taking HFCs and allowing
these lenders to issue co-
branded credit cards. The
rules, ﬁrst suggested in
January, come from the
Finance Act of 2019, which
transferred the regulation of
mortgage lenders to RBI. The
guidelines include increasing
liquid assets from 13% to
15% for HFCs that accept
public deposits and requiring
the...
Read More
Disclaimer: Magicbricks aims to provide accurate and updated information to its
readers. However, the information provided is a mix of industry reports, online …
Show More
Property Options in Bangalore
Explore the residential properties in popular localities of Bangalore and
ﬁnd the best ﬂat, house/villa, and plots in the city that best match your
budget and requirements.
Tags
Home LoanFlats  House  Plots  Villa
Flats in HSR Layout Flats in Kanakapura Road Flats in Whiteﬁeld
Flats in Varthur Flats in Sarjapur Road Flats in Electronic City
Flats in Marathahalli Flats in Koramangala Flats in Hebbal
Comments
G V Hemanthkumar
19 Dec 2024 01:47 PM
Home Loan is doable in company name (partnership) ?
Antim lahoti
26 Sep 2024 05:07 AM
य ु िनयन  ब ँ क  का  सच    िकतन े  िदन  का  होता  ह ै ?
Rakesh Kumar
23 Sep 2024 05:56 PM
Bank is changing interest on the full tenure inspite the account is being
closed on early date Kindly advise
john
08 Aug 2024 10:10 PM
I have take a home equity loan and the Bank has charged me the repo
rate plus spread of 3.00 %. Is this a correct charge ? Please help me .
Edwin Antony D'Cunha
30 Sep 2023 05:55 PM
When I took home, the loan rate of interest was 8.15% and now got
increased to 9.65%. Can I ask for a conversion to the current rate for
new home loans. My CIBIL score is over 800, and I have no default in
installments and credit card payments.
ARAVINTH Manikandan
04 Sep 2023 08:56 PM
Can my request for reduction interest rate on a home loan with ﬂoating
interest rate option be declined by my lender without any reason? I
have a credit score over 800 & no default in installment so far. My
home loan interest rate when I took was 8.35% and now got increased
to 9.5%. When I asked for a conversion inquiry, my banker did not
approve it.
Kamsala
11 Jul 2023 01:34 PM
what is the percentage of O/D interest for delayed instalment payment
as per RBI guidelines
Bharti Sharma
26 May 2023 04:04 AM
I'm Single working Mother of a Daughter of 19 & both of us Jointly want
to apply for Home Loan. Is it Compulsory, that we required to provide a
male Guarantor ? If we are unable to get a male Guarantor, Can't we
get the Home Loan? Please advise. Thanks .
Visual Stories
Gautam Adani
HouseHousing
Schemes
Pradhan Mantri
Awas YojanaWrite a comment...
PRYAG Tripathi
16 May 2023 06:50 PM
1.  ा  हम  लोन  2 वष    क े  अ ं दर  खत्म  कर  सकत े  ह    एनबीएफसी  होम  लोन  पर  और  इस  पर
िकतना  एिडशनल  चाज    लग े गा ?
म ु ज  ल  हसन
15 Mar 2023 10:38 AM
 ा  ॉपट   लोन  को  एक  वष    स े  पहल े  होम  लोन  म    बदलन े  पर  नया   ाम्प  श ु ल्क  द े ना  पड़ े गा
या प ू व    क े   ाम्प  श ु ल्क  ही  चल  जाय े गा  क ृ पया  बताए ं
ARPIT KUMAR
06 Oct 2022 02:21 PM
JISKA HOME LONE CHAL RHA H KYA 3 YEAR M VALUATION HOTI H KYA
HME USKI FEES DENI PDTI H AGR DENI PDTI H TO KITNI
Enter your name  Enter your email
Please answer this simple math question.
Cancel  SubmitWrite Comment
Mumbai Nagpur
Expressway
Mukesh Ambani
HousePradhan Mantri
Awas Yojana
Gramin
Pradhan Mantri
Awas Yojana
Urban
DDA Housing
Scheme
CIDCO Lottery
RGRHCL
APSHCL
Basava Vasati
Yojana
PM UDAY
